# Baseline nowcast

## Summary

Nowcasting right-truncated epidemiological data is critical for timely
public health decision-making, as reporting delays can create misleading
impressions of declining trends in recent data. This package provides
simple nowcasting methods for practical use based on using empirical
delay distributions and uncertainty from past performance. It is also
designed to be used as a baseline method for developers of new
nowcasting methods. It supports standard data frame inputs with
reference date, report date, and count columns, is compatible with
‘epinowcast’ objects, and also supports direct use of reporting
triangles. Alongside an opinionated default workflow, it has a low-level
pipe-friendly modular interface, allowing context-specific workflows. It
can accommodate a wide spectrum of reporting schedules, including mixed
patterns of reference and reporting (daily-weekly, weekly-daily). It
also supports sharing delay distributions and uncertainty estimates
between strata, as well as custom uncertainty models and delay
estimation methods. For more details on the performance of the method(s)
in this package applied to case studies of COVID-19 and norovirus, see
our recent pre-print at
<https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2025.08.14.25333653v2>.

## Installation

Installing the package

To install the development version from GitHub (warning! this version
may contain breaking changes and/or bugs), use the [`pak`
package](https://pak.r-lib.org/):

``` r
pak::pak(file.path("epinowcast", "baselinenowcast"))
```

Another option for installation is using the [`remotes`
package](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/remotes/index.html):

``` r
remotes::install_github(file.path("epinowcast", "baselinenowcast"))
```

## Resources

We provide a range of other documentation, case studies, and community
spaces to ask (and answer!) questions:

Organisation Website

Our [organisation website](https://www.epinowcast.org/) includes links
to other resources, [guest posts](https://www.epinowcast.org/blog.html),
and [seminar schedule](https://www.epinowcast.org/seminars.html) for
both upcoming and past recordings.

Community Forum

Our [community forum](https://community.epinowcast.org/) has areas for
[question and answer](https://community.epinowcast.org/c/interface/15)
and [considering new methods and
tools](https://community.epinowcast.org/c/projects/11), among others. If
you are generally interested in real-time analysis of infectious
disease, you may find this useful even if you do not use
`baselinenowcast`.

## Contributing

We welcome contributions and new contributors! We particularly
appreciate help on [identifying and identified
issues](https://github.com/epinowcast/baselinenowcast/issues). Please
check and add to the issues, and/or add a [pull
request](https://github.com/epinowcast/baselinenowcast/pulls) and see
our [contributing
guide](https://github.com/epinowcast/.github/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md)
for more information.

### How to make a bug report or feature request

Please briefly describe your problem and what output you expect in an
[issue](https://github.com/epinowcast/baselinenowcast/issues). See our
[contributing
guide](https://github.com/epinowcast/.github/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md)
for more information.

### Code of Conduct

Please note that the `baselinenowcast` project is released with a
[Contributor Code of
Conduct](https://github.com/epinowcast/.github/blob/main/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).
By contributing to this project, you agree to abide by its terms.

## Citation

If you use `baselinenowcast` in your work, please consider citing it
with `citation("baselinenowcast")` (or
`print(citation("baselinenowcast"), bibtex = TRUE)`):

``` R
To cite baselinenowcast in publications please use the following.

  Johnson KE, Tang M, Tyszka E, Nemcova B, Wolffram D, Ergas R, Reich
  NG, Funk S, Mellor J, Bracher J, Abbott S (2025). "Baseline
  nowcasting methods for handling delays in epidemiological data."
  _medRxiv_. doi:10.1101/2025.08.14.25333653
  <https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.14.25333653>,
  <https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2025.08.14.25333653v2>.

A BibTeX entry for LaTeX users is

  @Article{,
    title = {Baseline nowcasting methods for handling delays in epidemiological data},
    author = {Kaitlyn E. Johnson and Maria Tang and Emily Tyszka and Barbora Nemcova and Daniel Wolffram and Rosa Ergas and Nicholas G. Reich and Sebastian Funk and Jonathon Mellor and Johannes Bracher and Sam Abbott},
    year = {2025},
    journal = {medRxiv},
    doi = {10.1101/2025.08.14.25333653},
    url = {https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2025.08.14.25333653v2},
  }

  Johnson KE, Tyszka E, Bracher J, Funk S, Abbott S (2025).
  _baselinenowcast: Methods for baseline nowcasting right-truncated
  epidemiological data_.
  <https://github.com/epinowcast/baselinenowcast/>.

A BibTeX entry for LaTeX users is

  @Manual{,
    license = {MIT},
    title = {baselinenowcast: Methods for baseline nowcasting right-truncated epidemiological data},
    author = {Kaitlyn E. Johnson and Emily Tyszka and Johannes Bracher and Sebastian Funk and Sam Abbott},
    year = {2025},
    url = {https://github.com/epinowcast/baselinenowcast/},
  }
```

## Contributors

All contributions to this project are gratefully acknowledged using the
[`allcontributors` package](https://github.com/ropensci/allcontributors)
following the [allcontributors](https://allcontributors.org)
specification. Contributions of any kind are welcome!

### Code

[kaitejohnson](https://github.com/epinowcast/baselinenowcast/commits?author=kaitejohnson),
[seabbs](https://github.com/epinowcast/baselinenowcast/commits?author=seabbs),
[jamesmbaazam](https://github.com/epinowcast/baselinenowcast/commits?author=jamesmbaazam),
[TimTaylor](https://github.com/epinowcast/baselinenowcast/commits?author=TimTaylor),
[sbfnk](https://github.com/epinowcast/baselinenowcast/commits?author=sbfnk)

### Issue Authors

[jonathonmellor](https://github.com/epinowcast/baselinenowcast/issues?q=is%3Aissue+author%3Ajonathonmellor),
[swo](https://github.com/epinowcast/baselinenowcast/issues?q=is%3Aissue+author%3Aswo),
[jcblemai](https://github.com/epinowcast/baselinenowcast/issues?q=is%3Aissue+author%3Ajcblemai),
[lauraajones2](https://github.com/epinowcast/baselinenowcast/issues?q=is%3Aissue+author%3Alauraajones2)

### Issue Contributors

[jbracher](https://github.com/epinowcast/baselinenowcast/issues?q=is%3Aissue+commenter%3Ajbracher)
