# Baseline nowcast

## Summary

Nowcasting right-truncated epidemiological data is critical for timely
public health decision-making, as reporting delays can create misleading
impressions of declining trends in recent data. This package provides
simple nowcasting methods for practical use based on using empirical
delay distributions and uncertainty from past performance. It is also
designed to be used as a baseline method for developers of new
nowcasting methods. It supports standard data frame inputs with
reference date, report date, and count columns, is compatible with
‘epinowcast’ objects, and also supports direct use of reporting
triangles. Alongside an opinionated default workflow, it has a low-level
pipe-friendly modular interface, allowing context-specific workflows. It
can accommodate a wide spectrum of reporting schedules, including mixed
patterns of reference and reporting (daily-weekly, weekly-daily). It
also supports sharing delay distributions and uncertainty estimates
between strata, as well as custom uncertainty models and delay
estimation methods. For more details on the performance of the method(s)
in this package applied to case studies of COVID-19 and norovirus, see
our recent pre-print at
<https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2025.08.14.25333653v2>.

## Installation

Installing the package

To install the development version from GitHub (warning! this version
may contain breaking changes and/or bugs), use the [`pak`
package](https://pak.r-lib.org/):

``` r
pak::pak(file.path("epinowcast", "baselinenowcast"))
```

Another option for installation is using the [`remotes`
package](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/remotes/index.html):

``` r
remotes::install_github(file.path("epinowcast", "baselinenowcast"))
```

## Resources

We provide a range of other documentation, case studies, and community
spaces to ask (and answer!) questions:

Organisation Website

Our [organisation website](https://www.epinowcast.org/) includes links
to other resources, [guest posts](https://www.epinowcast.org/blog.html),
and [seminar schedule](https://www.epinowcast.org/seminars.html) for
both upcoming and past recordings.

Community Forum

Our [community forum](https://community.epinowcast.org/) has areas for
[question and answer](https://community.epinowcast.org/c/interface/15)
and [considering new methods and
tools](https://community.epinowcast.org/c/projects/11), among others. If
you are generally interested in real-time analysis of infectious
disease, you may find this useful even if you do not use
`baselinenowcast`.

## Contributing

We welcome contributions and new contributors! We particularly
appreciate help on [identifying and identified
issues](https://github.com/epinowcast/baselinenowcast/issues). Please
check and add to the issues, and/or add a [pull
request](https://github.com/epinowcast/baselinenowcast/pulls) and see
our [contributing
guide](https://github.com/epinowcast/.github/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md)
for more information.

### How to make a bug report or feature request

Please briefly describe your problem and what output you expect in an
[issue](https://github.com/epinowcast/baselinenowcast/issues). See our
[contributing
guide](https://github.com/epinowcast/.github/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md)
for more information.

### Code of Conduct

Please note that the `baselinenowcast` project is released with a
[Contributor Code of
Conduct](https://github.com/epinowcast/.github/blob/main/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).
By contributing to this project, you agree to abide by its terms.

## Citation

If you use `baselinenowcast` in your work, please consider citing it
with `citation("baselinenowcast")` (or
`print(citation("baselinenowcast"), bibtex = TRUE)`):

``` R
To cite baselinenowcast in publications please use the following.

  Johnson KE, Tang M, Tyszka E, Nemcova B, Wolffram D, Ergas R, Reich
  NG, Funk S, Mellor J, Bracher J, Abbott S (2025). "Baseline
  nowcasting methods for handling delays in epidemiological data."
  _medRxiv_. doi:10.1101/2025.08.14.25333653
  <https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.14.25333653>,
  <https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2025.08.14.25333653v2>.

A BibTeX entry for LaTeX users is

  @Article{,
    title = {Baseline nowcasting methods for handling delays in epidemiological data},
    author = {Kaitlyn E. Johnson and Maria Tang and Emily Tyszka and Barbora Nemcova and Daniel Wolffram and Rosa Ergas and Nicholas G. Reich and Sebastian Funk and Jonathon Mellor and Johannes Bracher and Sam Abbott},
    year = {2025},
    journal = {medRxiv},
    doi = {10.1101/2025.08.14.25333653},
    url = {https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2025.08.14.25333653v2},
  }

  Johnson KE, Tyszka E, Bracher J, Funk S, Abbott S (2025).
  _baselinenowcast: Methods for baseline nowcasting right-truncated
  epidemiological data_.
  <https://github.com/epinowcast/baselinenowcast/>.

A BibTeX entry for LaTeX users is

  @Manual{,
    license = {MIT},
    title = {baselinenowcast: Methods for baseline nowcasting right-truncated epidemiological data},
    author = {Kaitlyn E. Johnson and Emily Tyszka and Johannes Bracher and Sebastian Funk and Sam Abbott},
    year = {2025},
    url = {https://github.com/epinowcast/baselinenowcast/},
  }
```

## Contributors

All contributions to this project are gratefully acknowledged using the
[`allcontributors` package](https://github.com/ropensci/allcontributors)
following the [allcontributors](https://allcontributors.org)
specification. Contributions of any kind are welcome!

### Code

[kaitejohnson](https://github.com/epinowcast/baselinenowcast/commits?author=kaitejohnson),
[seabbs](https://github.com/epinowcast/baselinenowcast/commits?author=seabbs),
[jamesmbaazam](https://github.com/epinowcast/baselinenowcast/commits?author=jamesmbaazam),
[TimTaylor](https://github.com/epinowcast/baselinenowcast/commits?author=TimTaylor),
[sbfnk](https://github.com/epinowcast/baselinenowcast/commits?author=sbfnk)

### Issue Authors

[jonathonmellor](https://github.com/epinowcast/baselinenowcast/issues?q=is%3Aissue+author%3Ajonathonmellor),
[swo](https://github.com/epinowcast/baselinenowcast/issues?q=is%3Aissue+author%3Aswo),
[jcblemai](https://github.com/epinowcast/baselinenowcast/issues?q=is%3Aissue+author%3Ajcblemai),
[lauraajones2](https://github.com/epinowcast/baselinenowcast/issues?q=is%3Aissue+author%3Alauraajones2)

### Issue Contributors

[jbracher](https://github.com/epinowcast/baselinenowcast/issues?q=is%3Aissue+commenter%3Ajbracher)

# Package index

## All functions

- [`allocate_reference_times()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/allocate_reference_times.md)
  : Allocate training volume based on combination of defaults and
  user-specified values for training volume for delay and uncertainty
  estimation.

- [`apply_delay()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/apply_delay.md)
  : Apply the delay to generate a point nowcast

- [`as_reporting_triangle()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/as_reporting_triangle.md)
  :

  Create a `reporting_triangle` object

- [`as_reporting_triangle(`*`<data.frame>`*`)`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/as_reporting_triangle.data.frame.md)
  :

  Create a `reporting_triangle` object from a data.frame

- [`as_reporting_triangle(`*`<matrix>`*`)`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/as_reporting_triangle.matrix.md)
  :

  Create a `reporting_triangle` from a matrix

- [`assert_baselinenowcast_df()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/assert_baselinenowcast_df.md)
  :

  Assert validity of `baselinenowcast_df` objects

- [`assert_reporting_triangle()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/assert_reporting_triangle.md)
  :

  Assert validity of `reporting_triangle` objects

- [`baselinenowcast()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/baselinenowcast.md)
  : Generate a nowcast

- [`baselinenowcast(`*`<reporting_triangle>`*`)`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/baselinenowcast.reporting_triangle.md)
  : Create a dataframe of nowcast results from a single reporting
  triangle

- [`baselinenowcast_df-class`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/baselinenowcast_df-class.md)
  [`baselinenowcast_df`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/baselinenowcast_df-class.md)
  : Nowcast Data.frame Object

- [`combine_obs_with_pred()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/combine_obs_with_pred.md)
  : Combine observed data with a single prediction draw

- [`construct_triangle()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/construct_triangle.md)
  : Generate a single retrospective reporting triangle

- [`construct_triangles()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/construct_triangles.md)
  : Generate retrospective reporting triangles

- [`detect_structure()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/detect_structure.md)
  : Detect the structure of a reporting triangle

- [`.apply_mask()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/dot-apply_mask.md)
  : Apply mask to extract the elements of the matrix that are both true

- [`.assign_allocation_from_ns()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/dot-assign_allocation_from_ns.md)
  : Assign number of reference times to delay and uncertainty from the
  sizes

- [`.calc_n_retro_nowcast_times()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/dot-calc_n_retro_nowcast_times.md)
  : Calculate the number of retrospective nowcast times that can be used
  after aggregating

- [`.calculate_ns()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/dot-calculate_ns.md)
  : Helper function to calculate various size requirements

- [`.check_against_requirements()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/dot-check_against_requirements.md)
  : Check target size against number of reference times available and
  the number required

- [`.check_lhs_not_only_zeros()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/dot-check_lhs_not_only_zeros.md)
  : Check if there are non-zero-values on the LHS of NAs

- [`.check_obs_and_pred()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/dot-check_obs_and_pred.md)
  : Check observations and predictions are compatible

- [`.check_to_filter_to_max_delay()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/dot-check_to_filter_to_max_delay.md)
  : Check that the reporting triangle contains the correct number of
  columns for the specified maximum delay

- [`.filter_to_recent_horizons()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/dot-filter_to_recent_horizons.md)
  : Filter to recent horizons

- [`.handle_target_exceeds_avail()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/dot-handle_target_exceeds_avail.md)
  : Helper for when target exceeds available reference times

- [`.perform_allocation_process()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/dot-perform_allocation_process.md)
  : Perform the allocation process

- [`.safelydoesit()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/dot-safelydoesit.md)
  : Safe iterator

- [`.validate_delay()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/dot-validate_delay.md)
  : Validate the delay PMF if it is passed in

- [`.validate_inputs_allocation()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/dot-validate_inputs_allocation.md)
  : Helper function to validate allocation parameters

- [`.validate_inputs_uncertainty()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/dot-validate_inputs_uncertainty.md)
  : Validate the specified number of reference times meets the minimum
  requirements

- [`.validate_max_delay()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/dot-validate_max_delay.md)
  : Check that the maximum delay is not too large, error if it is

- [`.validate_rep_tri_args()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/dot-validate_rep_tri_args.md)
  : Validate each item in the reporting triangle

- [`.validate_rep_tri_df()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/dot-validate_rep_tri_df.md)
  : Validate the reporting triangle data.frame

- [`.validate_uncertainty()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/dot-validate_uncertainty.md)
  : Validate the uncertainty parameters if they are passed in

- [`estimate_and_apply_delay()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/estimate_and_apply_delay.md)
  : Estimate and apply delay from a reporting triangle

- [`estimate_and_apply_uncertainty()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/estimate_and_apply_uncertainty.md)
  : Estimate and apply uncertainty to a point nowcast matrix

- [`estimate_delay()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/estimate_delay.md)
  : Estimate a delay distribution from a reporting triangle

- [`estimate_uncertainty()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/estimate_uncertainty.md)
  : Estimate uncertainty parameters

- [`fill_triangle()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/fill_triangle.md)
  : Generate point nowcast

- [`fill_triangles()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/fill_triangles.md)
  : Generate retrospective nowcasts

- [`fit_by_horizon()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/fit_by_horizon.md)
  : Helper function that fits its each column of the matrix (horizon) to
  an observation model.

- [`fit_nb()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/fit_nb.md)
  : Fit a negative binomial to a vector of observations and expectations

- [`new_baselinenowcast_df()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/new_baselinenowcast_df.md)
  : Combine data from a nowcast dataframe, strata, and reference dates

- [`new_reporting_triangle()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/new_reporting_triangle.md)
  :

  Class constructor for `reporting_triangle` objects

- [`reporting_triangle-class`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/reporting_triangle-class.md)
  [`reporting_triangle`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/reporting_triangle-class.md)
  : Reporting Triangle Object

- [`sample_nb()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/sample_nb.md)
  : Sample from negative binomial model given a set of predictions

- [`sample_nowcast()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/sample_nowcast.md)
  : Generate a single draw of a nowcast combining observed and predicted
  values

- [`sample_nowcasts()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/sample_nowcasts.md)
  : Generate multiple draws of a nowcast combining observed and
  predicted values

- [`sample_prediction()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/sample_prediction.md)
  : Get a draw of only the predicted elements of the nowcast vector

- [`sample_predictions()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/sample_predictions.md)
  : Get a dataframe of multiple draws of only the predicted elements of
  the nowcast vector

- [`syn_nssp_df`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/syn_nssp_df.md)
  : A synthetic dataset containing the number of incident cases indexed
  by reference date and report date. While data of this form could be
  from any source, this data is meant to represent the output of
  pre-processing the syn_nssp_line_list dataset, which is a synthetic
  patient-level line list data from the United State's National
  Syndromic Surveillance System (NSSP).

- [`syn_nssp_line_list`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/syn_nssp_line_list.md)
  : A synthetic dataset resembling line-list (each row is a patient)
  data from the United States' National Syndromic Surveillance System
  (NSSP) accessed via the Essence platform. All entries are synthetic,
  formatted to look as close to the real raw data as possible.

- [`truncate_triangle()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/truncate_triangle.md)
  : Get a single truncated triangle

- [`truncate_triangles()`](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/reference/truncate_triangles.md)
  : Generate truncated reporting triangles

# Articles

### All vignettes

- [Getting Started with
  baselinenowcast](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/articles/baselinenowcast.md):

  A quick start example demonstrating use of baselinenowcast

- [Mathematical methods for
  baselinenowcast](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/articles/model_definition.md):

  Description of mathematical methods used in the package

- [Nowcasting
  nomenclature](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/articles/nomenclature.md):

  Description of different nowcasting components and corresponding
  abbreviations

- [Nowcasting syndromic surveillance system data: a case study applied
  to the U.S. National Syndromic Surveillance Program (NSSP)
  data](https://baselinenowcast.epinowcast.org/articles/nssp_nowcast.md):

  A nowcasting example applied to data from NSSP
